---
title: Why A Blog?
date: 2008-06-05
---

After 22 great years of my life, I have decided to start a blog. I guess you could call me sort of an internet junkie. I spend hours upon hours every day cruising the web reading countless articles, blogs, product reviews, and anything else that catches my eye. I really could not imagine my life without a computer or the internet. What would I do? Anyways, a large majority of those hours spent perusing the internet is dedicated to sports. I am a HUGE sports fan. I have been my entire life. I grew up in Sunny Southern California playing the typical sports that every young kid plays including Baseball, Basketball, and Soccer. I went on to play basketball in high school and also in college at a small Division III school. Basketball is my true passion. I love each and every aspect of the game. And that is exactly what it is. Just a game. I know non-sports fans who believe that spending so much time on a game is a complete waste. I am not talking about the exercise part either. The watching, the reading, the arguing, and the agonizing over sports and your favorite sports teams. I really cannot explain it, but I guess it is kind of an addiction. I wish I worked as hard in school as I do intently watching and re-watching Laker games or reading up on the latest Laker trade rumors. But I don't.

So I decided to start a blog because anyone who knows me would say that I am a very opinionated person when it comes to Sports. My takes (to steal a phrase from Jim Rome) are not always what you would expect from me but I try to keep them honest and well-thought out. What better place to 'think out' my sports takes than in a blog. In high school I hated writing essays and papers. Since then I have developed an appreciation for great writing and more importantly the content that comes with the great writing. I am by no means a great writer, but I think I could pass for a decent writer and hopefully my writing isn't so bad that you might actually read my stuff. Another thing, I didn't start this blog for people to read it. I started it for myself, but obviously it would be great if people actually read and enjoyed my writing. 
